Justin Traglia: Good morning again.
Mario Vega: Good morning.
Justin Traglia: I was able to, or apparently I'm co-host this time, which is cool to see.
Justin Traglia: Like, via Z.
Mario Vega: Yes, yes, I can see myself as a host. I didn't even see that.
Mario Vega: When I joined. Nice.
Justin Traglia: So I can mute people now.
Justin Traglia: Thankfully.
Mario Vega: Great.
Mario Vega: Hello, Ben.
Ben Adams: Hey.
Mario Vega: Hey, everyone, let's give a couple more minutes to get time to be able to join, and then we can start.
Mario Vega: Thank you.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Good morning testers.
Mario Vega: All right, I think we have enough people to get started. So I'll just…
Mario Vega: I'll just… I'll just get started now.
Mario Vega: Yes, welcome everyone to ACDT number 87. Today is July 13, 2026. We have a very light agenda today. Just basically, the main topics are Glamsterdam.
Mario Vega: DevNet 6 and DevNet 7 deployment.
Mario Vega: So yeah, let's just get started for.
Mario Vega: The Amsterdam Debenhams Debenhams 6, current status.
Mario Vega: I think, Stefan put a very comprehensive thread on Ethereum R&D Discord. So, Stefan, would you like to kick off the…
Mario Vega: The status for Glasgow Dynamics, please.
Stefan Starflinger: Yeah, sure. So, in general, we have a pretty good participation overall. I think it's generally around 80 plus percent, which is very nice to see. There were just some
Stefan Starflinger: minor things that I noticed. Some nodes, couldn't recover from a fork. It seems Lodestar, Bazel, Lodestar, Erigon, they're…
Stefan Starflinger: the notes got hung up, because I think the EL refused to update its head.
Stefan Starflinger: I just restarted Lodestar Basel, and it seemed to recover, and I left Lodestar Erigon. How it is for now, if someone wants to look into that.
Stefan Starflinger: And otherwise, it was just minor things. I think NimbusCL had an issue, but that's already been resolved now, and it's working pretty well. I think Grandine, we looked into some issue where, there was some P99
Stefan Starflinger: delay in block production, but it was mostly just their events that they were publishing a little bit late.
Stefan Starflinger: And overall, I think it's going pretty well.
Stefan Starflinger: for Glamsterdam 6.
Stefan Starflinger: I think… Is there anything that anyone would want to say regarding DevNet 6?
Stefan Starflinger: Otherwise, I think we can move on to, DevNet 7.
Stefan Starflinger: Oh, right, I know.
Stefan Starflinger: Yeah, can you just continue?
Mario Vega: Yeah, for sure. I just wanted to first mention maybe the releases for Grand Theft Auto VII. We have 7.2 on the EL side, and I don't know the number of the CL.
Mario Vega: But yeah, Justin, do you want to?
Justin Traglia: I was just going to say it was out for 12.
Mario Vega: Perfect, perfect. So yeah, yeah, I think I think the consumption of the of the releases is the main question at the moment. Stefan, do you have like.
Mario Vega: any idea of how clients are doing on this regard.
Stefan Starflinger: So regarding the tests on the EL side, clients are doing pretty well. I think Nethermind, Guest, and ethrex are passing most of the tests.
Stefan Starflinger: And they're already working pretty well in Kurtosis networks locally. I'm not sure, maybe the other clients, Besu, Erigon, and Reth, could give an update how far they are.
Stefan Starflinger: With the EL tests?
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): I can give an update for a bit. So I have a local branch where we are failing around.
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): 40 tests or so. We are passing the majority.
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): I think it's something with the repricing that is wrong.
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): But I can push the changes and then we can try it in Kurtosis.
Daniel Lehrner (Besu): Because the majority of tests were passing.
Dragan Rakita: From Red's side, I'm passing all the stated blockchain tests and need to review changes and propagate them, so probably we'll have branch tomorrow morning.
Stefan Starflinger: Erigon, is someone here?
Andrew Ashikhmin: Yeah, I'm here. But I haven't caught up with the team member who is working on Glam. So them Devnet 7. So sorry I don't have an update.
Stefan Starflinger: Okay, and I think Nimbus here as well.
Dustin: Yeah, I mean that the.
Dustin: We should be… Passing most of them, I'm, I'm not certain of the exact.
Dustin: Situation.
Stefan Starflinger: Okay, I can look as well in more detail later. I think you're passing most of the consume engine tests and the consume RLP tests.
Stefan Starflinger: I will have to look that up.
Dustin: Yeah, I know the branch is not 100% ready, but it's reasonably close.
Stefan Starflinger: Also, by tomorrow.
Dustin: Okay.
Dustin: One would hope.
Stefan Starflinger: And I think next, maybe on the CL side, I saw a question from Justin. How far?
Stefan Starflinger: Clsr, if they could give an update.
Stefan Starflinger: I think…
Mario Vega: Is it Deco…
Stefan Starflinger: Yeah, the.
Mario Vega: My house.
Mario Vega: Everyone, anyone, anybody else?
Mario Vega: Any updates about the seal test passing.
Mario Vega: For the client?
Dustin: Nimbus passes all of the tests.
Justin Traglia: I know Lodestar does as
Justin Traglia: This Prysm passing.
Justin Traglia: Oh, cool. Personals password.
terence: Yeah, or passing.
Justin Traglia: Is there, is there anyone here from Grandine?
Justin Traglia: Yes, that's the only one left
Justin Traglia: Okay, we can follow up on that later.
Stefan Starflinger: Regarding DevNet 7, I've been doing some local testing and found a few issues that I've reported. One about peer scoring with Prysm, then a P2P issue with Nimbus.
Stefan Starflinger: And, otherwise, the else I've already reported, one Nethermind didn't connect to any outbound peers.
Stefan Starflinger: But I think we're very close to launching. I think I've pretty much everything ready. Either, after the call, I will, launch it soon.
Stefan Starflinger: Or maybe end of the day or tomorrow morning.
Stefan Starflinger: So I'm planning to launch with a bigger state so we can train test the Soc.
Stefan Starflinger: State, so I'm planning to launch with, half a million exited validators.
Stefan Starflinger: With a validator balance of 1024 ETH withdrawal credentials of 0x02.
Stefan Starflinger: And I'm planning to manually deploy the 8282 contract.
Stefan Starflinger: So that we can kind of test, how it would be.
Stefan Starflinger: On the live network.
Stefan Starflinger: That's kind of the update from my side for definite 7.
Mario Vega: There was one question from Dustin. Do you know which gas limit is?
Stefan Starflinger: I think right now I've set it to 200 million, but I'm also open to suggestions.
Mario Vega: And also, I guess, are you running any fuzzing?
Mario Vega: transactions, or… Spam, anyway.
Stefan Starflinger: Yes, we will start with… well, we will wait for the fork, and then we will be running fuzzing transactions, a mix of different ones.
Mario Vega: Ben asks for 300 million.
Stefan Starflinger: I think we could, if we all have, I think, E70 implemented.
Stefan Starflinger: Then we should be okay with a higher gas limit.
Stefan Starflinger: for the DevNet.
Mario Vega: Any other clients have any thoughts on 300 million?
Mario Vega: Maurice is sure.
Mario Vega: Any thoughts from Nethermind, Basu?
Mario Vega: Everyone.
Ben Adams: I think never mind that, yeah.
Mario Vega: Oh, yeah, that's necessary. Sorry Besu seems okay.
Mario Vega: Reth.
Dragan Rakita: Yeah.
Mario Vega: Okay, Stefan, are you okay with 300 million?
Stefan Starflinger: Yeah, let's do it.
Mario Vega: All right, let's go.
Mario Vega: Yeah.
Mario Vega: Cool. Any other questions regarding Amsterdam? That's it.
Mario Vega: PL or CL related.
Mario Vega: That is true. Do you want to expand on that? Should we also see a client for this?
potuz: I just wanted to mention this, that discussions about gas limit should involve the CL as the CL is now a determining factor on the slot restructuring.
potuz: And moreover, this is also something for CL devs. CL devs should know the numbers that benchmarkers are pointing because we should be taking part of this discussion. So we should be more informed than we typically are.
Ben Adams: I I hope you're on the call.
potuz: Sorry, Ben?
Ben Adams: I said I'd hope you're on the call.
Ben Adams: Maybe you should run through the CL people.
Mario Vega: Yep. So apart from Prysm, are there any other CL clients that want to oppose 200 million?
potuz: Wait, wait.
Mario Vega: Limit for.
potuz: I didn't say that Prysm is opposing anything. We're happy with 300 million as well. I mean, I'm happy. I'm not sure about the other Prysm members.
Mario Vega: Got it, okay. So, yeah.
Mario Vega: Any other SEAL clients have any talks about either 300 million gas or 200 million gas?
Mario Vega: On the… on the glancer.devin7.
Mario Vega: All right. Yeah. Seems like it's a go. We stick with 300 million. Thanks for raising the point, potuz.
Mario Vega: All right. I think that's it for general updates.
Mario Vega: There's 1 extra topic that is not related to either El or Cl. That I want to bring up. That was put in the agenda today, which is the Glamsterdam upgrade mascot.
Mario Vega: Basically just go into the, I'm gonna share the link to the final decision.
Mario Vega: And,
Mario Vega: It's it's here. Basically, there's a decision. Now, please, clients comment. If there's like opposition to the final mascot for Amsterdam has been decided.
Mario Vega: Basically, that's it.
Mario Vega: Regarding the rest of the topics, we're gonna have a different dynamic today, regarding the EL breakout and CL breakout.
Mario Vega: For the EL breakout, we're gonna stay in this same call, and for the CL breakout, we're gonna jump into a different call, right?
Mario Vega: Before we jump, are there any topics that have to be discussed by both EL or CL before we jump into the different calls?
Mario Vega: If not, then we can just proceed. Basically, ELDevs, stay here. CLDevs, Justin just shared the link to the other call in the chat. Please jump into the call and then we can start the discussion.
Justin Traglia: All right, bye all.
Mario Vega: All right. I guess we can just start with the CL. Sorry, EL.
Mario Vega: discussion topics. So the only discussion topic for today for the Eel breakout is this.
Mario Vega: share the link.
Mario Vega: Yeah, this update to EIP-7937.
Mario Vega: This was found by Jochem.
Mario Vega: And also…
Mario Vega: I mean, I guess the champion is Tony for this. Does Jochem or Tony want to share a little bit more context on this?
Mario Vega: update.
jochem-brouwer: Yeah, I can share.
jochem-brouwer: Without this update, it's possible to construct blocks which are 8 times the size of what we actually would expect.
jochem-brouwer: This updates…
jochem-brouwer: Fixes the book where the floor cost for the data floor accounting is only done at the transaction level and not done at the block level.
jochem-brouwer: So this updates solves the problem that the flowing is not applied to the block size.
Mario Vega: Okay. This has been already mentioned. It was also on release 7.2, I guess.
Mario Vega: Does any client have any comments on this?
Mario Vega: Yeah.
Mario Vega: Tony, anything to add to this this point?
Toni Wahrstätter: Not really. I reviewed Jochem's PR, and it seemed like a clear bug.
Toni Wahrstätter: I did use PR.
Toni Wahrstätter: So please, I think it's… I'm not sure if it's already merged, I have to check, but please review that one, as well as Jochem's PR.
Toni Wahrstätter: I see Spencer saying it's merged, perfect.
Toni Wahrstätter: Yeah, it was a simple change.
Mario Vega: This is a breaking change, Stefan. So basically this is a consensus difference.
Mario Vega: We have it in this 7.2.
Mario Vega: release.
Mario Vega: As far as I know.
Mario Vega: So basically,
Mario Vega: if… yeah, it is included, basically, but I'm not sure we didn't have a chance to discuss this, basically. That's why I'm raising the point also.
Mario Vega: I don't know if there's any opposition to this in Devon 7, or is if there's like
Mario Vega: Any comments from clients, basically.
Mario Vega: That's mean.
Mario Vega: main issue.
Maria Silva: Oh, just… just to clarify, it's, like, it's already merged in the specs, so I guess, like, clients would have to change their implementations to see
Maria Silva: all this… passing. Is this correct?
Mario Vega: James, that is that is correct.
Mario Vega: Okay. Spencer, can you confirm this is 7.2, right?
spencer: Yeah, so, I guess, yeah, so this was, like, mentioned on Friday.
spencer: Just, like, a day after we did the 7.1 release, and yeah, it seemed like such an obvious,
spencer: Spec change that Jochem found, so just tagged a release really quickly and got the 7.2 release out, so.
spencer: And as far as tests breaking, I think it may be…
spencer: Change the couple tests, and then…
spencer: To Tony's PR, I added an extra test.
spencer: to that before merging. So there's an extra test and a change to, like, I think two or three tests, so it shouldn't really affect
spencer: And.
spencer: Much, yeah.
spencer: So I think it's a… it's a fair hot
spencer: But yeah, I guess relaying what Mario said, if anyone's against it, now is the time to.
spencer: To see.
Mario Vega: All right.
Mario Vega: I think that's basically it for today's discussion for the EO. I mean, is there any other topics? I mean, just to close this one, does anybody have any questions about this?
Mario Vega: this EIP change.
Mario Vega: Yes, Maria, please go.
Maria Silva: I was going to raise another point, so let's first close this one.
Dragan Rakita: Just to repeat this about floor gas, basically getting included in the regular gas for the block.
Maria Silva: That is, that is correct, Ran.
Dragan Rakita: Okay, that's good.
Mario Vega: Yes, as far as I understand, it was, the now service.
Mario Vega: Potential issue.
Mario Vega: Any other questions around this, or can we continue to the next…
jochem-brouwer: Yeah, I just want to correct that denial of service point, because it's not really a denial of service. It's about the points raised by EIP-7623. So, we have a max-sized block, at least we assume this, but
jochem-brouwer: before the spec change, we could actually produce much larger, larger box than, what we thought was our maximum.
jochem-brouwer: So it's not really a denial of service, but it's
jochem-brouwer: Okay, you could also see it as a denial of service, but it's more that our assumptions did not hold anymore.
Mario Vega: All right. I think we can continue. Maria, do you want to bring up the next topic?
Mario Vega: Hey, how are you, man.
Maria Silva: Yes, so this is mostly a question that I wanted to ask you. We are mostly at the…
Maria Silva: end of the of the Devnets. Right? And I was wondering what is the appetite for like doing some small tweaks that are not like they are not changing the mechanisms, but they are
Maria Silva: clearing, like, making the EIPs clear or something. So, what I mean, like, one of the ideas was
Maria Silva: That Johan was suggesting, for instance, instead of the regular gas variable in 1837, we could maybe call it something like execution gas, which is a bit more forward compatible as we go with more dimensions.
Maria Silva: It wouldn't change anything on, like, this…
Maria Silva: mechanism itself, but it would maybe require some renamings in the specs.
Maria Silva: So I wonder, like, what is the appetite for, at this point, introducing these sort of, like, small changes for the next DevNet?
Maria Silva: Or do you feel like we shouldn't do it?
Mario Vega: Yeah, I.
jochem-brouwer: Yeah, to add to this point, so these changes would only land in the EIPs. So for clients themselves, like if a client wants to call it a regular guess, execute guess, compute guess, it doesn't really matter. The thing is that these EIPs, this is the first thing that people are going to read about this fork because it's an official document.
jochem-brouwer: And this is also our, well, I would not say only, but our first and most important chance to actually create, well, yeah, like good terms for this so that this is force compatible and not confusing in the future.
jochem-brouwer: This is also why I think that they should.
jochem-brouwer: carefully consider, like, what is actually the text of these EIPs once we move them to final.
jochem-brouwer: Because if we… introduce, like, I'm not saying that regular gas, for instance, is, like, a vague concept.
jochem-brouwer: But if you can just clarify it a little bit more so that the ecosystem, the community can understand it faster, then this is the time to do it. And we should not do that like in the next world that we say, okay, we are going to rename this because that would then require an EIP.
jochem-brouwer: to basically redact or to alter these EIPs.
jochem-brouwer: So, yeah, that's… that's why I'm proposing, like, to… to… yeah.
jochem-brouwer: To do that in a good way now.
Maria Silva: I think, other thing that I was thinking about,
Maria Silva: was, and I think someone raised this, I don't remember where, so apologies if I'm not,
Maria Silva: saying the name of the person, but, on 2780, we have this additional cost for the logs.
Maria Silva: And then we realized that actually there are some other logs that are emitted and they are not priced directly, like with calls, for instance.
Maria Silva: And, so maybe it would make sense for us, for now, to just keep everything consistent.
Maria Silva: So we wouldn't have a specific log transfer cost in 8037. And instead, we just have the base cost and the transfer with value.
Maria Silva: The values would be summed up to be the same. So we still have the 21K. It's just we wouldn't have these with value being as low as it is now. It would be a bit higher because we are not separating, making these log costs separate.
Maria Silva: So I think it would actually make the EIP a bit more.
Maria Silva: a bit clearer, but it would mean, for instance, a slight change in the variables, values in the variable names. Not the variable names, but we would remove the log part of the name.
Maria Silva: of it.
Maria Silva: So… so yeah,
Maria Silva: How do you? How do people feel about doing this on Amsterdam? Devnet 8. That be feasible.
Maria Silva: Okay.
Maria Silva: If yes, I can… make the edits to the EIPs, and then share.
Dragan Rakita: I think it's desirable.
Dragan Rakita: It's going to simplify how the people are going to read it, so I think we should do it.
Dragan Rakita: I would not, 2780 could be…
Dragan Rakita: There's a lot of modifications that we could additionally do to that IP, and I would restrict ourselves to, like.
Dragan Rakita: Not doing more consensus, bigger consensus changes, and go with this, like, simpler approach.
Dragan Rakita: But renaming, doing more, like, cleaning up, everything around that seems… Really great.
Maria Silva: Okay, perfect.
Maria Silva: So I guess. Yeah, that's all I wanted to ask. Thank you for your feedback.
Mario Vega: Are you going to propose the PRs and then share it with the… That's right.
Maria Silva: Yes, yes, so I'll make those changes. I don't know, I will make them this week, but I don't think there's also rush, because we are still working on DevNet 7, right?
Mario Vega: I mean, from what I understood, these are not going to modify any consensus rules, right? This is just basically just clean up, right? So I don't think it affects us in any way.
Maria Silva: Okay.
Maria Silva: Okay, but yeah, so I will try to do it, not sure if I'll be able to have it this week, but at least, next week should be…
Mario Vega: Sounds good.
Mario Vega: Alright. Thanks. Thanks, Maria, for sharing this. I think this is basically the last topic that we have for today. So I wanted to open quickly the floor to anyone that has any other topics that want to discuss regarding basically anything related to Devnets or any other topics.
Mario Vega: Alright, going once… Twice.
Mario Vega: Price.
Mario Vega: Cool. Yeah, I guess that's it for today.
Mario Vega: Thanks, everyone. This was a quick call, basically. Thanks, everyone, for joining, and catch you on Thursday call. Thank you.
jochem-brouwer: Thank you. Bye-bye.
Toni Wahrstätter: Thank you, bye bye.
Gary Rong: That would be nice.